---
title: 'Rigour in Ancient Greek Mathematics'
date: 2021-06-12
permalink: /posts/2021/06/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - maths history
  - writing
---

Here I aim to answer two distinct questions: **_how_** did rigour first emerge in Ancient Greece and **_why_**? 

What is rigorous mathematics? HOW and WHY did this first emerge in Ancient Greece? 
======

Rigour in mathematics relates to methods of demonstrating mathematical proofs as well as to the degree to which a mathematical argument is logically valid. Mathematical rigour is in the axiomatic-deductive approach to mathematics, a methodology started by the Greeks, remarkable for using undefined terms and axioms (from "axios" meaning 'worthy' or 'fit', understood by them as 'self-evident truths'), and using these premises to prove theorems using deductive logic. 

The Greeks showed keenness not only to the exactitude and precision of results or the veracity of conclusions, but to the suitability or otherwise of the methods used to obtain 
them [C1:p301]. Nevertheless, or rather, because of this, there still existed much disagreement on the character of the assertions that mathematics could make, as well as on their justification [C1:p307][B2:p73]. Even Archimedes comments that results obtained by the use of his Method had still to be proved rigorously using the standard procedure at the time of the method of exhaustion: questioning not only the matter of 'acceptable' methods, but also of what constitutes a proper demonstration [C1:p299]. 

Though rigour has been a largely subjective term, the earliest comprehensive model of how 'pure mathematics' should be treated is Euclid's treatise Elements [K1:p58], which was widely considered by mathematicians as "a model of rigour" until well into the 19th century [K4:p87].The Elements demonstrated how nearly the entirety of mathematical knowledge could be represented as a unique, comprehensive system, all "derived from a limited number of indemonstrable starting points" [C1:p304]. 

There are several reasons both internal and external to mathematics for the shift in rigour in early Greek times that we will consider. The ratio of incommensurable magnitudes, the paradoxes on motion, and the validity of infinitesimal methods are three important problems for the Greeks that shaped much of mathematics [B2:p74]. For example, the Pythagoreans' discovery of the incommensurability of the side and diagonal of a unit square shocked and encouraged mathematicians to review the foundations of mathematics [K2:p182]. Moreover, the need to distinguish between contradictory results imparted on the Greeks by earlier civilisations elevated the need for more demonstrative methods of proof [G1:p2][K2:p155][K3:p3]. 

An important factor is the nature of Greek society. A limited democracy allowed citizens to partake in courts of law which developed their sensibility for argumentation 
techniques [G1:p1][K3:p3]. It was the obvious shortcomings of the 'science of rhetoric' which accentuated the need for a proof which goes "beyond mere persuasion" 
[N1:p309]. Parmenides' deductive argument showing that "all of ultimate reality is an unchanging unity" is one of the oldest examples of an indirect proof, a method also used 
by his pupil Zeno, noteworthy for his four paradoxes of motion whose 'proofs' are also examples of deductive reasoning [G1:p1]. Zeno's paradoxes increased the Greeks' 
questioning of the use of infinitesimals, and perhaps helped the invention of the method of exhaustions [B1:p25]. One of the earliest 'satisfactory' proofs is ascribed to Eudoxus by Archimedes, who also implies Eudoxus has derived the method of exhaustion [B2:p82]. 

Greek culture valued contemplation and studiousness [G1:p1]; noted throughout mathematics is an emphasis on the abstract, that being a gift from early Greek philosophy. The predisposition to philosophical inquiry cannot be understated, as the Greeks sought answers to ultimate questions, and as such were concerned with proof and the methodology of reasoning. Unsurprisingly, many early Greek philosophers were mathematicians [N1:p307], as boundaries between now distinct intellectual pursuits were not as distinguished [C1:p307]. The demand for arguments that are "irrefutable or incontrovertible" is expressed by different writers with an impressive variety of words [C1:p306]. 


<br>

If you are curious and want to learn more check out these sources! If you don't know where to start I'd recommend Boyer or Katz. <br>

[B1] Ball, W. W. Rouse. A Short Account of the History of Mathematics, Dover (1960) <br>
[B2] Boyer, Carl B. A History of Mathematics, John Wiley & Sons (2011) <br>
[C1] Chemla, Karine. The History of Mathematical Proof in Ancient Traditions, Cambridge University Press (2012) <br>
[G1] Grant, Hardy. Turning Points in the History of Mathematics, Birkhauser (2015) <br>
[K1] Katz, Victor J. A History of Mathematics, Addison-Wesley (1998) <br>
[K2] Kleiner, Israel. Excursions in the History of Mathematics, Birkhauser (2010) <br>
[K3] Kleiner, Israel. "Rigor and Proof in Mathematics: A Historical Perspective." Mathematics Magazine, vol. 64, no. 5, 1991, pp. 291-314. JSTOR, JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/2690647. <br>
[K4] Kline, Morris. Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times, Oxford University Press (1972) <br>
[N1] Netz, Reviel. The Shaping of Deduction in Greek Mathematics, Cambridge University Press (2004) <br>


